Add NAP for multicanvas (#249)
napari/docs: docs/naps/8-multiple-canvases.md

### Out of Scope
* Improvements to VisPy to support multiple views of the same `SceneGraph` (sharing data, saving VRAM) - for relevant discussion start with [vispy/#1992](https://github.com/vispy/vispy/issues/1992).
* For now, canvas arrangement (for example: tiling behavior) will be handled in the view only (left to Qt or custom Qt widgets). Making this state (de)serializable is out of scope for this project, but may be relevant when implementing a “savable viewer state” feature.
* Normalizing slice data for different layer types, though this may benefit in the course of this work.
* Specific UI implementations will be explored as part of this work, but I expect UX and UI will be formalized later (possibly in a separate NAP).
* Supporting alternative frontend (Qt) and backend (Vispy) frameworks. While this work should not make such tasks more difficult in the future, explicit consideration is out-of-scope until further progress is made in these areas.
* [Non-goals also in NAP-3](https://napari.org/dev/naps/3-spaces.html#non-goals) are related but also considered out-of-scope here

>     * Separation of rendering information from the Layer(Data) model

Reviewer: Would this benefit the work here or do you think of it as mostly orthogonal? Would a simultaneous effort help or hinder progress here?

Reviewer 2: I think layergroups here could potentially provide a cleaner API, but overall the API is similar to current grid mode at least for multichannel view, thus could be an orthogonal effort.

Author: I don't think it's entirely orthogonal, but perhaps mostly. I think it depends on the scope of features we want. For example just below I propose for all canvases to share a common layer list, with independent slicing, camera, dimensionality, and layer visibility. I think this would be more relevant if supporting (for example) different colormaps for the same data in two canvases.

```{image} _static/multicanvas-napari-architecture-today.png
---
name: fig-1
---
Fig. 1: napari architecture today.
```

Figure 2 shows proposed changes (in orange) to the architecture to support multiple canvases. The new architecture is still following the MVC pattern. Again, this diagram only includes the Image layer type. Here is a summary of the planned changes:
* Slice state will be moved off the layer as necessary, into new `LayerSlice` classes for each layer type
    * This will be different for each Layer type - unifying the structure in the process may be a secondary benefit but is not the goal
* Each VispyCanvas will hold a reference to a dedicated model class (`CanvasModel`)
    * dims will move from `ViewerModel` -> `CanvasModel`
    * camera will move from `ViewerModel` -> `CanvasModel`
    * `layer_to_slice` will map each Layer (global list) to a `LayerSlice` (one per `CanvasModel`)
* `ViewerModel` will own a *list* of `CanvasModel` objects
* `QtViewer` will own a *list* of `VispyCanvas` objects
* `VispyLayer` subclasses will hold references to their `Layer` (for rendering information) as well as a `LayerSlice` (for data)

> * The LayerSlicer will need to update the sync and async callbacks[^async-only] to pass a canvas parameter where the resulting sliced data will be stored, rather than storing it on the layer itself. Slice task cancellation logic will need to be revisited accordingly.

Reviewer: One alternative here that came to mind is that each canvas (or maybe vispy canvas) could own its own layer slicer - that way you don't need to pass in the extra canvas parameter and you can do cancellation per canvas (which I think is desirable).

With lots of canvas, you might introduce too much concurrency, but in most cases, maybe that won't be too bad. And we may be able to serialize it with a shared resource/controller if needed.

Author: Thanks - that's an interesting idea I hadn't considered. I was initially thinking the current LayerSlicer may expand to use a pool instead of a single thread.

I think you're right passing the full canvas is probably more than necessary, and trying to pass a canvas ID or something feels a bit hacky to me. One benefit of just passing the canvas object is that it would bring with it the camera, which might be useful for finding `corner_pixels` without waiting for the draw.

    * async callback: `LayerSlicer._on_slice_done`
    * sync callback: `Layer._slice_dims`
* Callbacks (interaction, events) will need to be specifically connected to individual `CanvasModel` objects where relevant (dims, camera) rather than the `ViewerModel`.

```{image} _static/multicanvas-napari-architecture-tomorrow.png
---
name: fig-2
---
Fig. 2: napari architecture tomorrow, with proposed changes from this NAP highlighted in orange.
```

> Note: in both diagrams, the `on_draw()` method on the `VispyCanvas` breaks MVC convention (view layer talks directly to the model layer). This is a separate/known issue and I believe is mostly only true for multiscale image layers right now. Changing this is considered out of scope for this project at this time.

> Slice state for each layer is currently stored on the Layer model. Again, see [NAP-4 for previous discussion](https://napari.org/stable/naps/4-async-slicing.html#existing-slice-state). This NAP proposes to move this state off the Layer instance, into a specific Layer Slice instance. This is what will allow multiple slices of a single layer to be visualized simultaneously. *Table 1* lists the attributes related to slice state that will be moved in this work from each Layer class into corresponding Layer Slice classes.

Reviewer: Maybe I misread the out-of-scope section, but my impression was that moving slice state off the layer was a non-goal - is that wrong?

Or maybe this is the proposed approach that incidentally achieves that non-goal?

Anyway, I'm generally in favor of that move, but just wanted to clarify the proposal and intent here.

Author: Do you mean this non-goal?
> Normalizing slice data for different layer types, though this may benefit in the course of this work.

That's not really what I meant there, but also I think it's ambiguous enough warrant changing or removing. I was trying to say it is a non-goal to create a uniform/generic concept (or Protocol) of a "slice" - it's okay for the slices to be quite specific for each layer type.

Reviewer: No, I meant this one.

> Separation of rendering information from the Layer(Data) model

But maybe you meant that only with respect to NAP-3.

Anyway, I also agree that a generic slice class/protocol should be a non-goal. Though we might consider during/after.

Author: I see - I will try to make this more clear. The goal here is indeed to move the slice state off the layer. The non-goal was meant to indicate that the remaining attributes of the layer will not be separated. So for example this work does not necessarily make it easier to share data between two layers with different colormaps.

> Note: some layers include "seleciton" information (Points, Shapes, and Tracks). How selection is handled in multicanvas view is TBD at this point.

***Table 1** - Layer attributes that hold slice data. These attributes will be moved from the Layer onto individual Layer Slice objects (one Layer Slice per Layer per Canvas).*

> > TODO: make this a list or figure out a way to center it [name=Ashley A]

Reviewer: I regretted adding something like this to the async slicing NAP, because it's just too much detail, so another option might be to remove it from the main NAP document and maybe link to it or shove it into an appendix.

Author: I found it helpful to write this out, but if it's too detailed I'm happy to move or remove it. It might just fit better in a PR with actual code changes.

| Layer Class | Slice Attributes |
| -------- | -------- |
| Base | `_slice_input`
| | `_slice_indices`
| Image, Labels | `_data_view`
|| `_empty`
| Points | `_view_size_scale`
|| `_indices_view`
|| `_selected_view`
| Surface | `_view_vertex_values`
|| `_view_vertex_colors`
|| `_data_view`
|| `_view_faces`
| Vectors | `_view_data`
|| `_view_face_color`
|| `_view_indices`
|| `_view_alphas`
| Tracks | `_view_data`
|| `_view_size`
|| `_view_symbol`
|| `_view_edge_width`
|| `_indices_view`
|| `_selected_view`
|| `_selected_box`
|| `_drag_start`
| Shapes | `_data_dict`
|| `_data_view`

> TODO: add rough class definition(s) for Layer Slice(s)
> Also - the various `_<Layer>SliceResponse` classes introduced by async slicing may already fill much of this role. Another option to consider here is to codify a protocol ([`typing.Protocol`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/typing.html#typing.Protocol)) for these classes. Even this protocol may not be necessary - early prototypes use these classes as-is with minimal modifications.
> [name=Ashley A]

### UI Design and Architecture

> Specific UI design and architecture remains to be determined. This will be explored as part of step 4 in the [Implementation Plan](#Implementation). UI design needs additional refinement and exploration, and this is expected to continue after basic/core implementation propsed in this NAP is complete. UI changes may also be described in a separate NAP along with a discussion of convenience functions and affordances for common operations. Some placeholder or experimental code will be used in the meantime as a prototype implementation.

Reviewer: Is there any prototype code available to look at and play with? And/or some videos showing some of the proposals here at least kind-of in action?

Both could help to ground some of the proposals and discussion here.

Author: My prototype/experimentation code is pretty early, but is here:
https://github.com/aganders3/napari/pull/13

Some open questions here are (for example):
* Should each canvas also have visible dims sliders, or can we keep one set of dims sliders that changes based on the active (selected) canvas?
* What kind of cross-reference displays or tools should there be?

>     * though-plane slice indicators

Reviewer: Typo?

```suggestion
    * through-plane slice indicators
```

* [3D Slicer](https://www.slicer.org/)
* [Orthogonal views in ImageJ and Imaris](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=94d8sHMP_w8)
* [OHIF/Cornerstone.js](https://www.cornerstonejs.org/live-examples/crosshairs)
* [neuroglancer](https://neuroglancer-demo.appspot.com/#!%7B%22dimensions%22:%7B%22x%22:%5B8e-9%2C%22m%22%5D%2C%22y%22:%5B8e-9%2C%22m%22%5D%2C%22z%22:%5B8e-9%2C%22m%22%5D%7D%2C%22position%22:%5B2914.500732421875%2C3088.243408203125%2C4045%5D%2C%22crossSectionScale%22:3.762185354999915%2C%22projectionOrientation%22:%5B0.31435418128967285%2C0.8142172694206238%2C0.4843378961086273%2C-0.06040274351835251%5D%2C%22projectionScale%22:4593.980956070107%2C%22layers%22:%5B%7B%22type%22:%22image%22%2C%22source%22:%22precomputed://gs://neuroglancer-public-data/flyem_fib-25/image%22%2C%22tab%22:%22source%22%2C%22name%22:%22image%22%7D%2C%7B%22type%22:%22segmentation%22%2C%22source%22:%22precomputed://gs://neuroglancer-public-data/flyem_fib-25/ground_truth%22%2C%22tab%22:%22source%22%2C%22segments%22:%5B%2221894%22%2C%2222060%22%2C%22158571%22%2C%2224436%22%2C%222515%22%5D%2C%22name%22:%22ground-truth%22%7D%5D%2C%22showSlices%22:false%2C%22layout%22:%224panel%22%7D)

## Implementation

> 1. Introduce minimally disruptive `_canvases` attribute on the ViewerModel

Reviewer: I'm fully in support of this ordering where implementation of architecture changes happen first to support new functionality later.

One mistake on the async slicing project is that I didn't do enough to prioritize things that way, which meant that things didn't end up quite as I'd hoped.

    * Modify `VispyCanvas`
        * Get camera and dims information from associated `CanvasModel` instead of `Viewer`
        * Obtain relevant data from Layer Slice instead of Layer
    * Modify `ViewerModel` and `LayerSlicer` [^async-only]
        * Submit `CanvasModel` (or an ID) to `LayerSlicer` instead of dims directly
        * Emit `CanvasModel` (or an ID) and slice data from `LayerSlicer.ready` and/or `Layer.set_data` events
        * `VispyCanvas` will subscribe to relevant events, set data if corresponding to its own `CanvasModel`. Other canvases may also be interested in this event for example to update cross-reference overlays.

3. Update `QtViewer` and `VispyCanvas` to support multiple canvases
    * Still only displaying one canvas at a time in the main widget
    * Update main widget as `ViewerModel` “active” canvas changes, storing additional canvases and swapping them out as necessary

4. Update `QtViewer` to show multiple canvases simultaneously
    * This is exploratory work at the moment, see [UI Architecture](#UI-Design-and-Architecture) section below

> [^async-only]: Depending on the timeline and prototype implemetiaton, it may be acceptable/prefereable for mutli-canvas feature to rely on (currently experimental) async slicing ([see NAP-4](https://napari.org/stable/naps/4-async-slicing.html)).

Reviewer: I think that shouldn't be needed and if it is, I'm happy to help make that need go away.

Also, all the typos :D

```suggestion
[^async-only]: Depending on the timeline and prototype implementation, it may be acceptable/preferable for multi-canvas feature to rely on (currently experimental) async slicing ([see NAP-4](https://napari.org/stable/naps/4-async-slicing.html)).
```

Author: Yeesh those typos 🙈

I agree I don't think this is necessary. This was speculation before I started prototyping but so far it hasn't been an issue. I can remove this note.
